Esa es la hija de ese que tuvo el accidente.
Su muchachita que dejó chiquita.
Ya fue para Filadelfia ella y vino. Ahora que salió
de las vacaciones, se fue para Filadelfia y vino.
Antier vino ella.
Bueno, en este... Accidently, that's how it was.
Some of my friends arrived, my brother-in-law and
a friend, and I was working. They said, where is
Lupe? I saw them coming. So they said, there he
comes.
Pensé yo algo, que algo pasaba. Entonces llegaron
y me dicen, buenas tardes, buenas tardes. Dice,
les digo, ¿qué pasó?
Pues no, Doña Lupe, ¿sabe qué pasó? Muy mala
suerte, dijo. And he was really unlucky. He said,
what? He said he had an accident with Urbano. What
do you mean with Urbano?
He said, yes. He said, we don't know if he lives or
not. Because right now he was going to the
ambulance.
Asina was so fast, but I thought at the same time
that he couldn't be dead. He could
be alive. I said, I don't know what I thought at that
time.
Soon I told my boys, let's go. Ruri was the driver.
Ruri wasn't very tall. Porque mi muchacha ya se
había casado. Entonces, les dije yo...
Les dije yo, este...
Les
dije yo, vámonos y pronto nos fuimos para la casa. I
didn't know what to do because my boy couldn't run
with the car that far. I sat down for a while and told
my boy, but I was thinking that this couldn't
happen. Soon I told my boy, you know what? I told
him, we're going to fix it right now. I told him,
we're going to, in the car, I told him, as far as the
Gonzales family is. And from there, let's see what
happens.
Pronto nos alistamos
y cuando fuimos, cuando llegamos, allí estaba
toda esa familia.
Entonces dice un compadre de ellos, dice, miren,
yo los llevo hasta donde pasó el accidente. Si
quiere ir, yo la llevo. Le dije, sí, vamos. The
chance that he is still there, the chance that they
took him, we don't know. We left. And those, that
land that was
there, well, we had to, no, they had already taken
him. He wasn't there anymore. He was there, his
shirt, his coat, it was everything.
No, they said, we asked, the bosses were still
there and they gave me his. The only thing I didn't
pick up was his watch. Because they didn't give it
to me, they didn't know if it was in his clothes
or not. Then they say, no, he's already at the
funeral.
Well, But God gave me strength. Why? Because I
changed, for the time being.
This street was like this. The big street went to my
house like this, right? I went there, and she went
here first, and I went back down the street. This
street was like this. Roel and Juanita there in the
yard.
Good afternoon.
Go away.
Don't come here anymore. So then he says, They were
there, and he said it was his wife, and they heard
the ambulance. And they all heard the ambulance.
And they said, what happened? So Juanita said,
let's see what happened. And he said, my
daughter-in-law, no, we're not going, because
who knows, there's a lot of traffic and they're
going to hit us. We're not going. So, when they went
to warn this Tirol, they took her to the doctor to
give her an injection so that she wouldn't notice.
And they came and warned her. She couldn't believe
it. And we went through there. And we said goodbye
and we didn't get up. I said to my daughter, we
didn't get up because we didn't want to tell you,
but they already knew everything, but we believed
that they didn't know what had happened.
No, they already knew, but those
children were not allowed to walk with anyone.
Those children were forced to walk with their
father all the time. They were the three children
he
left. All my friends came to the house all the time.
And she was making herself strong. She was fixing
everything. At night and during the day, she was
fixing everything by herself. Or just with Ruris
and Bembeses. And I was struggling with the
children and them, the boys. Well,
we went to the funeral the other day to fix it. And
then they told her what she thought with him. She
said, no, I'm thinking of taking him to Texas.
Because there we thought of residing all the time
in Texas. Entonces anduvo ella arreglando todo y
anduvo eso. Thank you very much. I'll see you.
Bye-bye. Mama, chance que vengan los muchachos
por la tocadisco. Se la preste a, nomás que le dije
que, nomás, por ella tenía que ir por ella. Pues ya
saben lo que son los muchachos.
And then she fixed
everything to bring it back
to Texas. All the friendships helped us because
from the very beginning, wherever I have been,
whether in Washington, whether in California,
Wherever I have been, they have appreciated me. I
have had many friendships and they have
appreciated
me well. So they helped us to find him. So she came,
my daughter-in-law came with him on the train,
with her husband. She came with her two children,
no, with her three children and her husband. I no
longer live,
I'm dead. It was very hard because I only
accompanied her in that. Pero yo nomás andaba con
ella porque yo no sabía inglés. Yo no sabía nada,
pero le daba valor nomás a ella. ¿Ella no habla
español? Ella habla inglés. Es mexicana, sí. Ella
habla español y en inglés. Sí, porque ella fue
enfermera aquí en Texas. Sí, ella trabajó mucho
tiempo de enfermera aquí en el Memorial. And my son
died and she continued working in the memorial.
Now? No, now she got married. Ah, another time. Ah,
yes. Yes. But then, I, my little boy, was not yet a
man to come on the road so far away. So
that he could drive a car. So... Yo le telefoné a mi
hijo que estaba en Washington y pues él por lo
pronto no me podía decir si podía venir o no. So I
called Arizona because the boy who was in
California was in Arizona. So I called Arizona and
they didn't find him soon. And I had to come. My son
came in the morning and I had to go out another day,
very early, to Texas. So then I told him, a little
friend Muy amigos esa pareja. Eran de aquí de
Texas. Entonces me dijeron, mire, no se preocupe.
Le voy a decir al patrón del brief. If you allow me to
go with you to Texas, I will take you. But what will
happen is that I will be away for a week and I will
have to leave money to my family to support the
week. And that is what you are going to give me. que
fueron como 80 pesos que yo le di para que me trajera
para Texas y se los dejara a su familia. Pues
entonces le dije, bueno, salemos mañana en la
mañana, le dije, para estar. Cuando mi hijo llegue
a Texas, yo llego también.
Preparamos todo porque yo he trabajado muy duro
But I have always tried to have good furniture. All
the time. Since I was here in Texas, I suffered a lot
when they paid the pizca very cheap. But I took care
of the money all the time.
Then she came,
my boy who is in Arizona, He came at night, but he
didn't call me. We had a garage that was our
favorite all the time. And they were Americans,
and all the time they looked after my children,
Rudy and the girls. And all the time we dealt with
them. And this boy never thought of calling me at
night because the bus only came to Fresno. And he
never thought of calling to go get him. So if he had
come with the car and with me all the way here, but he
didn't call at night when he got there. So he came
another day in the morning, it was like 9 o'clock,
and I had left at 4 in the morning to get here to
Texas. And he came very late, when I had already
come. Y el otro, bueno, entonces
me vine todos esos lugares. Me parece que fue en
julio, un junio. Yo creo que aquí tiene.
Ah. En junio. Por baño. Sí, en octubre. No. Se
murió? No. Oh. Oh, no. Oh, no. No, no. Este es. It was
in July 1959. Well, it was so hot in India.
All those places were very hot. But they brought us
gallons of water and everything. They brought us a
lot, but we always ran out. y muy caro donde había
hielo. Todo eso bien caro, pero como quiera lo
conseguían, pero venía bien caliente.
Bueno, entonces,
mi hijo llegó, llegó como era en la noche. Llegó mi
hijo, no sé si, no estoy ahorita segura a qué hora
llegó, pero él llegó en la mañana, me parece. El
cuerpo. Ya estaba todo aquí la gente porque aquí lo
conocían a él, pues aquí se criaron. Estaba el dipo
esperándolo a mi hijo. Y llegó,
lo recibieron, lo pusieron en la funeral. Yo
llegué en la noche. Estaba aquí, nomás entramos al
estado de Texas y fue pura
agua. Llegamos aquí. Todo triste. Las hierbas,
así. Nadie en aquí, todo cerrado. Entonces, mi
muchacho telefonó por ahí, estaban haciendo esos
caminos, esos freeways, y nosotros no lo sabíamos
porque estaban todos componiéndolos.
Pero en toda obra de Dios, ese señor que nos trajo,
pues, él no sabía para acá. Él era de Texas, pero él
no sabía. Entonces ya preguntaron ahí, dijeron,
no, están en la funeral. Y Angelita, ahí está él.
Llegamos aquí, nos fuimos allá, y ya nos fuimos
allá a la funeral. Allí estaban todos los
hermanos. Estaba la abuelita. Todas las
amistades estaban.
Bueno. There was his father, because when there
was the accident, Reina spoke to his father. She
told him what had happened. He was already
there. So, it would be like 10 o'clock at night, 11
o'clock, my son from Washington arrived. He
arrived by plane.
Ya cuando acordé yo, estaba mi hijo en el cajón de su
hermano.
Llore, llore. Hacían como, yo creo, como cuatro o
cinco años que no se miraban.
Y entonces me dijeron, llegó Silvestre ahorita,
mamá. Sí, dijo, sí, mírelo, ahí está.
Well, it's just that the other brother who was in
Arizona couldn't reach him because
of that. So, it
was...
We were there.
He...
They gave him military honors.
They gave him... His flag, his wife.
There is another thing. Always...
It is very sad when couples are not the same. The
marriages are not in agreement. Yes, this is a very
sad thing. It is sad, it is sad on the one hand. But in
that, he was there. He
was there, and he went and
told me. No, he went and told me about my husband. He
went and greeted me. Sunday, German Sunday. He
went and greeted me, and five.
Y pues me dijo lo que había pasado. Pues sí, es muy
verdad lo que nos ha pasado y todo. Pero yo fui una
madre que nunca les quité.
Siempre les dije, bueno o malo es su padre. Ya y para
allá. El hijo que quería verlo, está bien. El hijo
que no, ellos sabían. Porque yo les di a ellos,
hasta que ellos fueron unos hombres, fueron unas
mujeres, conocieron su padre, y yo nunca les quité
eso. Ellos tenían que reconocer si ellos querían.
Los que, tú sabes que cada mundo, un pensamiento
cada persona. Sí. Pero ellos se sintieron
contentos porque allí estaba él. Ese día estuvo
él, mandó las gracias para California.
Y todo muy bien. Mi nuera aquí se quedó, porque aquí
tiene sus familiares ella. Ella se quedó aquí con
mi mamá. Sí. Luego de aquí de mi mamá, ella se compró
una casita y se fue con su hermana. Sí. Hasta ella me
dijo que ella nos iba a casar hasta los tres años. Y
ella cumplió, porque hasta los tres años se casó. Y
ella una buena esposa, una buena mamá también con
sus hijos. Porque hasta ahorita ella, su, su, mi
nuera, que viene siendo la esposa del que murió,
que son los, la mamá de estos niños. Sí. Sí. Bueno,
ahorita sus, sus, sus, estos, pienso yo que mi
hijo, He was a good son to me and he left a good seed
because his children have been good until now.
Because the other boy who follows her is going to
finish his school next year, if God lets him. He's
going to finish his school. And the other boy
follows the same. El más chiquito, hermanito de
ella. Porque son tres hermanos de papá y mamá, que
son mis nietos míos, que dejó mi hijo el que murió.
¿Ves?
Y yo me siento, yo siempre, desde que Dios me dio mis
hijos, yo pensé en mí. Que Dios me diera mucha
salud. and that God would let me, until I saw my
children, be a man, educate them, if God would give
me permission, those, tomorrow or the day after,
could defend themselves, and they could take care
of themselves. And it seems that it was done, and it
seems that God granted it to me, that the day my
daughter finished her school, which is this one, I
was very bad in my heart. I was very bad. I lasted two
bad weeks, but I didn't tell my children that I was
bad. I only knew that I was bad. Until one night, Yo
no me sentí bien, yo me sentía más mala. Y yo le dije a
Rudy, Rudy, yo estoy mala, Rudy. ¿Me vas a llevar
con el doctor? Sí, mamá, dijo. ¿Por qué no había
dicho que usted estaba mal? Dije, yo creía que no
iba a estar tan mala. Luego, luego, se alistaron y
me llevaron al memorial, a la emergencia. I didn't
feel any shortness of breath or anything, I just
felt something inside, something that bothered
me. They took me there and then they gave me some
pills and they told me that I think it was from the
heart. And they said, and tomorrow, and they gave
me an injection, and tomorrow you take it to your
doctor. Otro día me llevaron y le dije yo, yo no
quiero que me den medicina. Le dije, yo quiero que
me apliquen los rayos. ¿Qué es lo que tengo ahí? Le
dije. Sí. Luego, luego me aplicó el doctor los
rayos y les dijo a mis muchachos, ¿sabes qué? Dijo
que tu mamá antes vive porque tu mamá está bastante
mala. Y dijo que nomás como tanto así no había
estado el corazón, que yo tenía vida. And I still,
as I don't understand English, but I, as I didn't
feel that they were attacking my breathing or
anything, I didn't think I was that bad. Well, they
got all scared and everything, and they said, if
you take care of her, you are going to have
attention with her. They put her in their house. He
said, and will you be able to stay in the house lying
down? I said, yes, because I can't do anything. He
said, well, my boys came and rented a bed for me, and
they put it there, and the girl, the oldest, she
attended to me. When I went, the doctor said, it's a
life, he said, that I didn't believe, he said, that
you could relieve yourself. I said, because you
were pretty bad. Why? Because I gave him and I
always asked my God. May God give me permission to
see my big children. When I saw my big children,
then what God wanted from me. But I already knew
that he had delivered my children. y mira lo que me
iba a pasar, ¿ves? Pero Dios me dejó todavía. Y le
doy gracias a Dios que yo quedé buena. Ahora, de
estos hijos, la misma cosa. Es una niña, no porque
es mi nieta, es una señorita, pero todavía estoy.
Ella anda, yo creo, en 20 años, señorita. No sé. No,
I have other bigger ones. You didn't see them. How
many children do you have? I have, I think, because
each child has five
children. Many. Only this one who is in
Philadelphia right now doesn't have. No. No,
because only here Reina has five. The one who is in
Washington has five. Ten. The one in California
has five. Fifteen? Yes. And then this other one has
another five.
Twenty?
Yes. Twenty grandchildren? And now you'll see.
And then I have two grandchildren. Two
grandchildren? Yes. I have the oldest of my
grandchildren, this one from Gravel. Two. Two.
Yes, yes. And how old are you? Well, I think I was
born...
I'm not very sure. But more
or less. I think I'm...
ten or... something. In 1910. In 1910,
more or less. 63 years old, more or less. Many
years. Yes, many years. Well, that's a good story.
Yes. A lot, a lot... I worked a lot. In California, I
worked a lot with my family. And not just me,
because my family helped me work all the time. When
there were holidays, we would go
to work. My family and I, everything was a
consequence of what I said. Sí, naturalmente que
sí ellos querían algo que de importancia de la
escuela, sí se las compraba, pero ellos no fueron
unos muchachos necios que dijeron, mamá, yo
quiero esto, yo quiero lo otro. Como aquí, como los
sufrimientos que yo pasé aquí en Texas, pues cada
año vistía yo a mi familia, ¿sí? Cada año era que
trabajaba mucho, más en el algodón, porque yo
desde el 37 comencé con el más grande a trabajar
aquí. Y todo eso lo usaba para comprarles todo lo
necesario de la escuela.
Los vestía de todo a todo con todo lo que piscaba.
Y cada año Asina lo hacía. My children, the more
they grew up, the more they helped me. And all the
time, I would gather all of that. And after I
finished working on the track, I would go to the
town, my whole family, and I would buy three for
each person who had clothes for school. Yes. Yes,
for each boy. three, four things for each one, so
that they could continue their school. Well, when
the year came, I had to save money for when the work
came back. I already had little, little, so much
clothes I needed. shoes, clothes, or something
that was more important, I had to buy it with that
money that was raised, or there were
opportunities to work for two or three days. I used
that for what I needed the most. Yes. Asina did it,
and I did it all my life. You see? Ese yo enseñé a
todos estos niños a cuidar. ¿Quién sabe? No sé.
Pero años muy pasados, en el café, daban un peso en
cada bote de café. Era un cheque que mandaban.
Entonces, todo el tiempo procurábamos esa clase
de café. Uno era porque nos gustaba. Y de lejos en
lejos llegó a juntar mi muchacho cinco pesos del
café.
Y entonces, él,
el daime, el nikle, él alzaba. He would give her
some five-pesos alcancillas. If there was any
damage, he would give her some. He would throw them
at her. Even the one that killed himself. He would
raise them until he would fill his alcancillas
with five pesos. When there was no more money, he
would say, Mom, I have it. I have it. And if I didn't
tell him, he would say, look, there's no money. Go
and take it out of the alcancillas. That's how they
were taught. And he had a wife that they would go to
eat and they were both in agreement with that.
Because that's how it was taught. Because he, the
older one started to bring the mandao. They would
carry it. They, their friends, would take the food
to the house, to this older boy. Then the little
boy, the second one, would go to the village. They
would carry their food. There were four of us where
we lived in the village. Ellos no cargaban, ellos
iban, y ellos iban a dejar al doctor pues más,
porque yo los doctores a mí me conocían y gracias a
Dios, donde quiera que iba con mis hijos, este
doctor, el otro doctor, que ya murieron unos, pero
todavía existe el STON. Ellos, iba yo, y si no iba
yo, iban ellos. Dice mi mamá, dice que usted me haga
esto. Está bueno. ¿Por qué? Porque yo dejaba de
comer por pagarle al doctor. Sí, ya les pasaba una
vez, se ganchó mi muchacho con un anzuelo por allá
en el arroyo, pescando aquí, yo ni sabía, y se
fueron de por allá luego, luego al doctor. ¿Qué te
pasó? Dice, pues mire, dice, Tu mamá no sabe, dice,
no. Y se los sacó el doctor, el anzuelo. Yo no
necesité pagar. Cuando iba yo no necesitaba
pagar, nomás me hacía vil, pero ella me conocía y
conocía a mis niños. De modo desde que si mis niños
estaban malos, yo no batallaba, porque yo tenía
doctor. Because I paid all the time. And I had
amistades with them and I knew them. See? That's
why I never mortified myself. Never from my
family. That I say, one broke a foot, one broke an
arm. Because I was at home all the time. And I never
let them go there. Nor that they were playing with
this and that. No. Why? Because I didn't have money
to cure them if something happened to them. The
only one I took care of was when my baby, Roel, was 40
days old. When he was little, he got hit by the
ferret. He got hit by the rodents, he got hit by the
scorpion, and after that he got attacked by the
ferret. Y como estaba así natan bebito y todo eso,
yo los tuve y lleve con el doctor y yo gasté como 20
pesos. Ya no tenía dinero y el doctor no me cobraba,
pero las medicinas tenía que comprarlas y no le
hacían las medicinas al bebito, ni podía
tomarlas. Entonces yo, dijo el doctor, mira,
dijo, I can't take your baby anymore, I don't have
the tools here, but I'm going to give you a paper so
that you can pass your baby to the memorial. And
with this paper they will take care of you. So I
looked at my baby and he was already gone. I just
touched his heart, I knew he was alive because his
heart was just blue. So, at night, it was like 3 in
the morning, when he got even more late, because he
couldn't take his medicines anymore. So, I told
him, my husband was there, and I said, look, here's
this paper, look for someone to take him to the
hospital. Then he went to the mayor and told him to
lend him a piece of furniture to carry him. And he
started to cry, my lord, he started to cry. Why?
Because there was no money to carry him. I told him,
we don't need money. Because with this paper we
have... How are we going to let him die? If with this
paper they have to take care of us, let's go. And
then I took him to the church. It was like this, like
this, like this, the baby. We got to Liles and I
talked to the father. Father, I told him to bring
the very bad child. He said, bring him. And he
already blessed him and everything. And I knew
that he was going to live because of the heart. We
got there, they put him in the bed there, and loose.
So we told them, and then we gave him the paper.
Entonces dice, llévenlo, entonces le pusieron
una inición ellos. Entonces dicen, llévenlo para
el cuartito donde están todos los bebitos, le
dijeron a las enfermeras. Por lo llevamos allá.
Bueno, ¿qué piensa usted que son las cosas más
importantes de la vida? Usted, claro usted, las
cosas más importantes de una vida buena. Tocante a
la familia. Sí. Well, right now, with all of this,
with the touch of the family, and how I raised my
family, well, the most important thing, and what
sometimes, now, is forcing us to lose our youth, is
Muchos padres por...
Muchos padres porque quieren trabajar. Porque yo
he oído que no pueden sostener la familia porque
son muchos. Y que por eso trabajan. Pero no pienso
yo que sea Sina. Because I mean that there are many
families, and I know people who have had up to 20, 25
families in the ranches that I know. And those
families had to maintain those families. No para
darles escuela, porque muchos. Pero esa es la
voluntad de la persona, de los padres. Porque
cuando la gente tiene voluntad y se apura por sus
hijos, así como se mortifica de darles un consejo
para que no hagan un mal, así no tienen que
mortificarse para su dedicación de ellos. ¿Por
qué? El trabajo es toda la vida. Esto no hay nomás
una vez, que es la de su juventud. Terminar su
escuela, o aunque sea una parte de su escuela, para
su, su, de él, de su futuro de ellos. Because the
future, the parents are already behind. The ones
who are going to fight are the children. And they
need to study so that those children get married,
they have to take care, work hard to keep their
children. And that's what they need. I didn't have
a degree, but I did. I looked a lot, and I sacrificed
a lot, as you have no idea, for them to have a school,
and to dress them when they earned so little. And I
took care of the cent a lot. That's what I'm saying.
Now there are many opportunities for children to
go to school. You don't know how much I get
mortified when I see the children of other people
who don't go to school. Like all the classes that
exist right now, All these classes cost money. All
this, look. Everything is pure money. You do one of
these things, you help yourself a lot. Ahora la
gente mejor quiere ver las historias, mejor
quiere platicar, mejor que no creo yo que no tenga
tiempo para agarrar dos, tres horas para hacer
toda clase de lo que nos están ayudando ahorita,
para el beneficio de uno. Ahorita no tiene la gente
necesidad de decir, quiero que me preste un peso.
Because if you sell anything, you make a living.
Because we don't all want to work, we want to make a
living and do it. And that's what I've always
wanted. And always when I hear and look, I'm
against it. From those parents who don't send
their children to school, who look, those boys are
just walking down the street. Those girls are just
walking down the street. The parents are working,
working because they don't complete what the
father earns. Esa familia está sola desde
chiquita, está sola en las casas. No saben qué
están haciendo esos hijos en la casa. They don't
know if they are going to this part or that part.
They don't know anything about that. Why? Because
they are working. The parents, those who are not
working during the day, work at night in the
canteen. They don't know who comes in and who goes
out, or anything about the house. Why? Because
they come in at night and leave at night. And they
don't know anything about how that house is being
treated.
Cuando el papá sale fuera de la casa, está la mamá en
la casa. Pero la mamá debe de saber, y es la que sabe
más a veces que los papaces. Que las mamaces saben
todo lo de los hijos. No más que habemos mamaces que
tapamos la cosa. Y no sirve. No sirve porque hay día
que eso no está bueno. It's not good that if the
child does something wrong, I don't tell the
father because the father can hit him and he can do
it. But if the mother can't correct that bad thing,
why doesn't she let the father do it? Now, if the
father is going to do a good thing, why does the
mother tell him, don't hit him or leave him? No, it
must be like that because he is correcting the bad
thing. And that's what I see, that it's not right.
And that's why all this that is happening now in the
youth is because the government is not at home.
That's what happens. I, look, I go here or I go there
with my family. Very few tell me. But when they come
to me and say, look, you are doing wrong. And you
don't do this and this. I'm going to do this. Don't
do this because it's wrong. And who causes it? You
don't attend here in the house. That's why. And if
you know it, you don't tell him. I didn't go to SINA.
I very little was in my lord.